This week on the podcast, two extra
special guests, Alex Emus and Richard
Thaylor, took Richard's book, The
Winner's Curse, and really completely
rewrote it and updated it for 2025. Um,
I've been privileged to speak with Dr.
Thaylor number of times over the past
few years. He's been a guest both
[music] both here and live in Chicago a
number of times. Uh, always a
fascinating conversation. And Alex Eis
is this really interesting professor who
I had no idea I have used and relied on
his previous research. Um, selling fast
and buying slow is a chapter in my book.
Um, [music] just an amazing coincidence.
Both fascinating people and I thought
this conversation [music]
was a lot of fun and I think you will
also with no further ado [music]
and Richard Thaylor on the winner's
curse.
Gentlemen, welcome to Bloomberg.
>> Thanks, Barry. Great to be back.
>> Yes, it's so great to have you. So, you
started, you wrote this book. It's 30
years ago already. Um, we're going to
get to to this in a bit. Before we do, I
want to just talk about both of your
backgrounds and how you began
collaborating. Uh Richard, you've been
called the godfather of behavioral
economics. Take us back to the beginning
when you were a young economist. How did
you become interested in psychology and
decision-making?
So when I was in grad school and I was
learning standard economics,
I kept pausing and saying really
[snorts]
because the models that we were being
taught
the PE well there are no people and
there are agents and uh there are firms
and there are things they call consumers
but they're not really people.
homoeconomist.
>> Homo Yeah. Homoeconomicus.
And
um and I started uh making a list of
dumb stuff people do. And but that was
just to annoy my friends. And uh but
then somebody introduced me to the work
of two Israeli psychologists, Danny
Conorman and Amos Tverki.
And when I read their papers, I had this
big aha moment because what their
research showed was not just that people
make mistakes. Of course, we all make
mistakes and can't remember where we
left our keys or what have you. What
what they showed was that behavior is
predictably different
from the model that economists use. And
that was an aha moment for me because it
meant I could say look the model is
wrong and in this direction and you can
think about that from from an investment
point of view. Mhm. It
>> I it's fine to say stock prices are
wrong,
that's fine, but useless. If you can say
which ones are too high and which ones
are too low, then all of a sudden you're
a very rich man. So I if if we could say
how people are different than this
artificial model, then we could be in
business.
And
then the so I was doing that for a
while. Managed to get tenure uh at
Cornell University
and spent a year uh with Conorman Tverki
and then a second soatic year with
Conorman. And
uh in 1985,
the year Alex was born,
uh I came back from sbatical and decided
to start writing a series of columns in
a new economics journal called the
Journal of Economic Perspectives. That
journal, by the way, here's a free tip.
That journal is available free to anyone
and the articles are written to be
understandable
>> and people don't know about it. If
you're really interested in economics,
go and read some papers.
>> And and the column you were writing was
called anomalies, which were all of
these things that were supposed to not
be possible given traditional economic
theory. Uh you mentioned Conoran and
Tverki
when you think of psychologists you
don't think of quantitative datadriven
rigorous models but really that was at
the heart of what they were doing wasn't
it? Well, eventually
the the the earlier work you're thinking
of prospect theory which was 1979. The
work they did in the 70s leading up to
that was on uh predictions or judgments
and the the models weren't very
quantitative.
They they were typically a little
scenario
and uh an almost like a thought
experiment. You know, there's a famous
experiment about Linda
>> and they give you a description of
Linda. [clears throat] She was an
undergraduate
active in social movements, went to lots
of demonstrations,
blah blah blah.
>> [clears throat]
>> She's now and now you get a list of
occupations
and you're asked to say uh which is most
likely and one of the ones is bank
teller
>> and another one is feminist bank teller
and people think she's more likely to be
a feminist bank teller than a bank
teller. Now obviously that cannot be
true. I shouldn't say obviously because
many people are now listening and saying
what does he mean obviously? Obviously
she's a feminist bank teller. She
couldn't just be a bank teller but
that's you know
>> do the number theory there are going to
be more bank tellers from this
>> bank think of a ven diagram
>> right there's a a a big circle of uh
bank tellers and then a small one with
feminist bank tellers. So that was the
kind of things they were doing. There
was a little bit of theory. So like they
had uh the idea was that life is hard
and so people used what they called
huristics, rules of thumb
uh to make judgments. One is called the
availability heruristic which is if it's
easier to think of examples of
something, it's more likely. So if you
ask people what's the ratio of homicides
to suicides,
people think maybe two or three to one
that homicides are more likely. It's
just not even money.
>> No, twice as many suicides.
>> Mhm.
>> Think about this before you buy a gun,
>> right?
>> The most likely person to get killed
with that gun is a family member.
So,
but again, notice this is a predictable
mistake
and because why? Well, there's lots of
stories in the newspaper about
homicides.
Suicides tend to be quieter. There's a
wonderful graphic from um our world in
data uh which was Hans Rosling's um work
that shows here's how things are
reported in the media and then here's
their actual percentage in real life.
Very little reporting on uh cancer,
heart disease, high blood pressure,
diabetes. you're 50,000 times more
likely to suffer from that than um
homicide, terrorism, or shark attacks,
which they love to uh
>> Right. Shark attacks,
>> don't worry about [laughter] those so
much Australia. Especially in Chicago,
it's probably not a big
>> Yeah, there are very few.
>> Um so, let's let's bring Alex in. So um
when Richard started out uh in the
field, there really wasn't any such
thing as behavioral economics,
>> you have an advantage a few decades
later of entering the field of behavior
of economics where behavioral economics
is a thing. Tell us a little bit about
what brought you into the field and how
you found your way over to Booth. Well,
so behavioral economics was a thing out
in the economics journals and you know
there were people certainly doing it uh
in various departments but it wasn't a
thing at as an undergrad like I don't
think there was a single behavioral
economics course offered at Northwestern
econ uh university while I and this was
200 uh 2003 through 2007. So even though
you know people were publishing
behavioral economics papers it was all
over the journals people generally in
the field knew about it as an
undergraduate it still had not made it
into the curriculum
>> 3 to07 Danny was 2002 won the Nobel is
that right
>> so you would have thought someone might
have picked up on that and yet
>> no I mean
>> Northwestern is a big school
>> you open up a microeconomics textbook
it's the same textbook from 1973
>> basically
>> and that's still true today
>> come on really I would have assumed at
this point. No, open up a textbook.
>> Uh Danny Conorman, Bob Schiller, Richard
Thaylor, how many how many Nobells have
to come in the space before
>> starts with perfect competition.
>> Uhhuh.
>> Uh then at the end maybe you learn
something about monopolies. Uh and that
that's pretty much it. So it's uh I
actually I was premed. I was I'm an
immigrant kid from Aldova. So my parents
are like, "Well, it's you're going to
the medical school or you're going to
fail basically." So, I got I had one
option on the table. So, I was premed.
Organic chemistry was real hard and it
was 8 8:00 in the morning. Uh, so I took
econ to kind of just boost my GPA. I
thought it was kind of fun,
>> right?
>> And, you know, I didn't and it was
interesting because I was taking these
psychiatry, abnormal psychology classes,
learning about human behavior. I was
taking economics, which is the study of
human behavior. And these were like two
completely different worlds,
>> right? economics is these hyperrational
uh utility maximizers had never made any
systematic mistakes and no I didn't
learn about a single deviation from that
principle in the entire four years I was
there and so I was I was thinking this
is kind of you know this is fun but not
something I wanted to do. I'm interested
in human beings. Uh, and then afterwards
I was applying to medical school and I
was doing a cross-country road trip uh
with one of my friends to Los Angeles
and we were listening to I think it was
NPR and uh it turned out expost I
figured this out Richard was on the
radio
>> talking about something called
behavioral economics and I was like what
is this and as soon as I got to Los
Angeles you know I I went on the
internet and I was like I got to find
out more about this field. So I within
two weeks I had you know talked to my
adviserss at Northwestern. I'm I I want
to get an econ PhD if I can do something
like this where I can combine my
interest in economics and bring in human
behavior into it. This is what I wanted
to do. So So let's talk about that.
There's something in the book, and we'll
get to that shortly, where you describe,
Richard, you describe an economist
developing a new model, a new
calculation for how um consumers should
behave in response to certain price
incentives. So the first time ever
someone creates this calculation and
then immediately afterwards and
therefore this is how all consumers are
or should be behaving when nobody had
thought of this previously. How do you
square that circle? How do you square
the model driven this is the right way
to do it. I just figured this out and
therefore everybody should be doing it
this way.
>> Yeah. You you know maybe just a tiny bit
of history will get us there. So,
economics didn't used to be that
extreme.
>> If you go back and read Adam Smith, he
talks about self-control problems and
overconfidence.
People think of him as the father of
right-wing economics.
That's not the guy. Um he did talk about
the invisible hand, but uh he was a
behavioral economist at heart and
economists were pretty reasonable until
about World War II. And then what
happened was people started writing
math, doing math, and they wanted to
write down models. And if you want to
write down a model, the easiest one to
write down is a rational model. [snorts]
And that's because
um anybody if you've taken high school
calculus
you know you can maximize you set the
first derivative equal to zero and
that's the model right so writing down a
model of some ish
uh is hard
>> then during the 70s and 80s
people started to at ideas for even
smarter behavior
and a norm kind of developed in
economics which is if the agents in my
model are smarter than the agents in
your model then my model's better than
your model. Hm.
>> And that's kind of crazy, but the that
was the way the the field was going
and and there was no real stopping it.
So, um, [clears throat] around the time
that Alex was thinking about going to
grad school, there were troublemakers
like me, uh, pointing at certain body
parts of this naked emperor, but the the
field was rushing toward an extreme
version
of Homoeconomicus,
where homoeconomicus
is a genius.
>> So, we were talking a little earlier
about the so-called wealth effect, which
is something that the economists at the
Federal Reserve love, the um the higher
the market goes, uh the wealthier people
supposedly feel and they all go out and
spend money. That's that's like just
such a perfect example of a model that
doesn't reflect the real world. um a a
huge amount of stocks are owned by the
top 10 percent. It's something like 52%
of stocks. The average person doesn't
really have a whole lot at stake in the
market. Um and the reality is people are
spending more money because the economy
is doing well. They have jobs. They're
getting raises which by the way all
helps the market. How often do we run
into these correlation causation issues
in economics?
>> Well, we run into them all the time.
Look, the big problem with that with the
wealth effect, there's a lot of
discussion of that in this book that one
thing economists leave out is what I
call mental accounting.
>> Mhm.
>> And if you look at an economic model of
the wealth effect, there's some big W
for wealth and that's it. And wealth
will include your house and your
retirement money and money you've set
aside for your kids' education and then
money that you intend to give to charity
>> and your future expectations
>> and right and
>> of all of the money that you stand to
learn.
>> Right. So
now the the people at the Fed if they're
just saying well W goes up then people
spend more. No, it turns out for example
if the value of your house goes up, how
much more do you spend? Approximately
zero.
>> Really?
>> Approximately zero. Whereas if um some
stock you own gets bought and you get a
check, you spend a lot of that.
>> If you win a lottery, you spend like
half of it
>> and go bankrupt. So, so where the money
sits
has a big effect on how much of it you
spend.
>> Your response to somebody's question,
how are you going to spend the windfall
from the Nobel Prize was one of my
favorite answers. You said it. Do you
recall?
>> Yeah. Well, I recall. I mean, this was
at 4 in the morning. [laughter]
um they call you and wake you up and
then say go get some coffee because you
have a press conference in half an hour.
And I uh had heard enough of these
interviews to know that somebody was
likely to ask me that question. And my
instinct was to say, well, you know, to
a real economist, this is a stupid
question because how am I going to know?
You know, suppose I go out and buy some
fancy new car. Barry likes fancy cars. I
don't. I like fancy wine. So, but
suppose I go and buy a case of fancy
wine. How do I know that's the Nobel
uh as opposed to the money I got from
selling a book.
>> All dollars are funible.
>> All dollars are funible. And you know, I
I realized later that what I should have
done is opened up a special account,
>> the Nobel Prize money,
>> the Nobel Prize money and a credit card
that's linked to that. And when I want
to go buy something stupid, just take
out the Nobel Card and life would be
more fun.
>> You But the line that you said was, "As
irrationally as I can."
>> Yeah. I said, "I'll just spend it as
irrationally as possible." Just I knew
it would be a memorable line.
>> So, [laughter] I It's so funny because
that line led to a conversation with my
CFO about the difference in all of these
um you know, the Chase Sapphire card or
the MX Platinum card where you get these
points and the rational CFO says, "Hey,
I want the money back each month." And
my response is always, it's a hundred,
$200. It's lost in your bank account.
You don't see it. When I get the points
and want to buy a fancy cappuccino maker
that my wife is going to yell at me, why
are you spending $2,000 on a cappuccino
maker, you idiot? My answer is, "Oh, no.
It's points. It's free." And she's like,
"Okay, go get it." It's the exact same
concept. If it if you have that silo,
that mental accounting, you could do as
much irrationality as you'd like.
>> So, you know, but watch out if she
listens to this podcast.
>> She listens to the first five minutes
and that's it.
>> Oh, yeah. So, you're safe. I'm okay.
Because So, I'll tell you a story about
um my daughter Maggie
who lives in Rhode Island and one of her
neighbors grew up to be a pitcher for
the Mets. Mhm.
>> And the Mets were playing in the
playoffs, the first round.
>> So, this is a long time ago.
>> Yeah. And this is an old story. And um
th this guy was going to pitch. So, I
call Maggie, "Hey, would you guys want
to go to the game? Let me see if I can
get tickets." And she says, "Oh, that'd
be great." So, I go online. The the game
is like tomorrow. And I find some
tickets. And there there were a bunch,
you know, on StubHub or something. You
could get tickets.
>> So, I text her back and said, "Look, uh,
here here's the website. It looks like
there are lots of tickets to choose
from.
>> Uh, how about uh the tickets were about
300 bucks." I said, "How about I'll text
I'll send you $1,000, buy the tickets
you want, spend the rest on hot dogs."
So you're you're doing an experiment on
your daughter to see if she buys the
cheap tickets or the expenses.
>> No. So she texts me back and says, "Lol,
this is just like in your book. If you
send me $1,000, I'm not going to use it
on baseball tickets."
>> So I've learned my lesson. Recently, she
wanted to go to a concert. David Burn is
on tour and he was in Providence where
she lives and she wanted to go and she
says there's some way you could get me
tickets. I sent her the tickets
>> instead of the money. That's so funny.
Let's talk a little bit about the book
The Winner's Curse. And I want to start
with Alex. So this book has been out
>> since you were a young kid.
>> You go to college. you eventually
figure, let me get a PhD in behavioral
economics or finance and economics. How
did you first discover this book? What
was your initial response to it? Um, so
I discovered it. There's not really any
textbooks in behavioral economics. So
you kind of get here through the grape
vine, oh, you should read this, you
should read that. You mostly read
journal articles.
>> Like with if you're thinking about doing
game theory or something like that,
there's like a
>> five or six textbooks that you can read.
With behavioral economics, there's not a
whole bunch. Winner's Curse was one of
those books that almost everybody
recommends because the Anomalies columns
are just very, very accessible. And then
you read the anomalies columns, they got
a bunch of references. You look through
the references. So, I had read the
original Winner's Curse, I think second
or third year of grad school. Um, and
then, uh, I got my first job at Carnegie
Melon. I had already known Richard for a
while at that point. We met in grad
graduate school. His office was happened
to be right next to mine in San Diego.
Uh and at some point I joined Booth and
he called me up I think like four or
five months into my into into my first
year and said hey um you know I got this
opportunity we want to we the publisher
asked us to update the book. Uh I'm
thinking of doing a little bit more than
just an update. You know the book's from
1992. There's been 30 years of research.
Are you interested in working together
on this? So, I I mean, I jumped on the
opportunity. One, you know, I get to to
work with Richard, which is super fun.
Um, but two, I mean, you know, I've been
doing behavioral economics research for
a while and I know how much demand there
is for a book that people can pick up
and read and say, "Hey, these are the
original anomalies. Here's the 30 years
of research that has happened since."
Now, I think at at that point, we were
thinking like, you know, six months,
>> do a little update. This is 2020.
This conversation happened in 2020. The
book is coming out now.
uh we you know basically the twothirds
of the book ended up being brand new. We
wrote uh we rewrote slightly each
anomaly's column as kind of the bedrock
but you know 30 years of research has
happened since and it took a while to
put all of that together. And
essentially what we showed is look the
original anomalies when you read them
most of the experiments most of the
findings are from you know college
students sometimes you know after a bad
night out in the lab for you know making
decisions over a dollar and the big kind
of push back from economists was look we
don't really care about these people we
care about you know institutional
investors CEOs we care about people who
are in the market with money on the line
making all these big decisions and so
what why Has behavioral economics become
a success? Honestly, largely because of
behavioral finance. Because of the fact
that behavioral economics, behavioral
economists said, "Look, we got access to
this amazing data on people making
consequential decisions day in and day
out and they're still making mistakes."
>> The same mistakes nobody seems to have
learned from our So, let let's let's
talk about that. Um, I I love what Danny
Conorman once said is, "I suffer from
all the same behavioral biases that I've
identified." You mean to tell me that we
have 30 years of data, all this
research, a handful of books, people
still make the exact same behavioral
mistakes they used to? Has there been
any change in behavior?
>> Uh, essentially no. And
that's not that surprising
because the stuff we're talking about
has been true as long as there have been
humans,
>> right? So, we talk about self-control
problems.
It's in the Bible, right? You know, uh
Homer talks about um Odysius
uh tying himself to the mast. That
that's like agreeing to have money taken
out of your paycheck and put into a
retirement plan. So, human beings,
yes, there's evolution, but evolution
takes thousands of years and 30 years is
the blink of an eye. Si
>> since you mentioned retirement accounts,
let's talk a little bit about choice
architecture and nudge. Um before uh I I
arrived here, I looked up what was the
impact of the default setting that you
helped change through choice
architecture. People used to get a new
job, sign up for a 401k, and the money
would come into that account. It would
sit there in cash. And rather than have
the default be cash, we through your
work created a default as a um either a
target date fund or a balance fund,
something like that. So it's not sitting
in cash. And it turns out there is about
$4.7
trillion with a t trillion dollars in
those funds of which 40% according to
recent research was the default setting.
So you get credit for about $2 trillion
in retirement savings that might have
otherwise just been sitting around in
cash. How does the concept of people
aren't learning from their mistakes? So
choice architecture is so important to
help people make better decisions. How
significant is that? Well, if you think
about what was going on in the in the
early 80s,
uh these defined contribution plans like
401ks were real new.
Uh
our parents w if they if you worked at a
big firm, you had a defined benefit
plan. My father worked for credential
insurance, you know, and his pension was
number of years worked times some
function of his final salary. No
decisions to make kind of like social
security.
>> And we bring in these uh defined
contribution plans. You have to decide
whether to join and if so, how much to
defer and then how to invest it. And
people had no clue. And a lot of people
just didn't even join, which is about
the dumbest mistake you can ever make.
>> If you have a company with a match,
you're basically turning down free
money,
>> right?
>> Which what economic model says that's
rational?
>> No. Well, right. So I would say to
economists look you would predict no one
would make this mistake but
one early study half the employees at a
company are not joining in the first
year.
>> It's amazing.
>> So how do we fix that? Well the simplest
thing was to change the default.
So we say it used to be you'd get a form
to fill out a piece of paper in those
days and if you want to be in the plan
fill out this form and say you want to
join and how to invest
change that to you're you welcome to
Riddle's management. Um
you're we have a pension plan. We're
going to enroll you unless you opt out
and we're going to enroll you into the
default fund unless you choose
otherwise.
So all of that was not possible
in the early 90s because there were
companies were afraid to do automatic
enrollment because they didn't have
permission
and target date funds weren't legal.
Uh ironically in the George W. Bush
administration
on one side they were campaigning to
partially privatize social security
but their labor department was
forbidding companies from investing in
anything that could go down. Mhm.
>> So, there was a bill passed in 2006
the
uh said, "Okay,
um you're allowed to automatically
enroll and have a uh and automatically
escalate what we used to call save
tomorrow and invest in some prudent
funds."
Um, and what was what you have to give
something up to get that. So what what I
suggested to there was a Republican
senator from Utah who was the running
the relevant committee. I said, "How
about if companies agree to do all three
of those, they're exempt from some
burdensome paperwork of
non-discrimination rules."
>> And so that's what the Republicans got
was less paperwork and people who cared
about the workers got something. And uh
so
>> and the workers got something
>> and the the workers got something. And
if they just do nothing,
then they're in and their contributions
are going up and they're in a sensible
uh investment uh product.
>> So this is kind of in nudge is kind of
fascinating because in the winner's
curse, you talk about things very much
related to what happens in investing. So
there's loss aversion and the status quo
bias and a variety of different things.
Let let's talk about what are the issues
that most relate to, as Alex said,
behavioral finance as opposed to
behavioral economics. What do we think
are the are the biggest factors that
explain
irrational human behavior in in stock
and bond markets?
So I think um there's a few things that
kind of people documented in the late
90s early 2000s that have just
replicated and just became bigger if
anything. So the disposition effect is
one of them. So the disposition effect
this is uh uh Sheffern and Statman they
dis they came up with a paper in 1985
documenting it originally. Terry Yodin
has this giant data set that he
published in 1999 documenting it in a
bit of a larger sample and then now it's
been replicated in Finland all over the
world and it's this tendency for people
you know when I when I buy a stock it
goes up in price what do I do I sell it
I want to realize my gains same stock
goes down in price it I you know this is
now a loss what do I do hold on to it so
it's this tendency to realize your gains
and hold on to your losses Peter Lynch
by by the way, 40 years ago used to call
that um cutting your flowers and
watering your weeds. That was his
expression for it. So it was it was
visible to a guy running a fund at
Fidelity in the 1980s.
>> Yes. And it's and this is just talking
about like are people learning? I mean,
apparently not because it's like it's
again you I bet you you download Robin
Hood data from today, you're going to
see it show up. Um, so that's the the
and this is kind of the tendency. You
know what feels good when you're when
when when you own a stock selling it at
a gain and you know telling your
friends, hey, you know, I bought that
thing for 90, it's 120. I just I just
made a lot of money. You know what feels
worse? Telling your friends, I bought it
at 90 and I sold it at 60. So you just
kind of hold on to it hoping something
happens. Maybe some people even double
up, buy more shares just to break even.
Um so the disposition effect this kind
of tendency for individual behavior to
uh you know realize gains avoid losses.
The other thing is I and in my view this
is kind of the bigger uh the bigger
principle is limited attention.
So you know there's a lot of stocks out
there which ones are people buying and
this is not just retail investors. This
is this is bigger institutional
investors too. Uh it's the ones that are
covered in the news. We were talking
about availability bias earlier.
What are the things that are coming to
mind? Things that that have recently
been covered. Maybe you heard an
earnings announcement call or something
like that. These attention-grabbing
stocks that are much more likely to go
into people's portfolios. It's because
people don't, you know, aren't
evaluating the entire uh the entire
universe of stocks whenever they think
they're thinking about something to buy.
So, so let's address that because the
United States happens of of all
countries not only has such a large
stock market, but the home country bias
is so acute here and you don't hear a
lot about foreign con companies all that
often. You mostly hear about local
companies, local CEOs, local products.
How significant is that sort of bias in
people's portfolios being not only
overloaded with their own country, but
hey, if you're in New York, you're going
to have more finance companies. If
you're in San Francisco, you have more
tech companies. If you're in the
Midwest, you're going to have more
manufacturing companies.
>> It's it's more extreme than that. If I'm
working for a specific company, I have
more of that stock.
>> When if anything, you should have more
diversified, right?
>> Yeah. I think
one campaign that has been moderately
successful is I think fewer companies
are foisting
stock of their own company onto the
workers. It used to be the match was
often paid in company stock.
>> Well, GE was notorious and they lost
half a trillion dollars of employee
investments because of their match.
Well, and uh Enron,
>> Enron, so my one of my one of my friends
uh their their their father, he was
working at Enron. He was a risk manager,
>> FYI. [laughter] Uh and uh Oops.
>> Just not a very good one.
>> Huge huge percentage.
>> Although although I could you could be
the greatest risk manager there, the
bosses were not listening to you.
[laughter]
>> Right. But they compounded it by putting
their employees money in the 401k into
and run stock. So they get fired
>> and their retirement money goes poof,
>> right? Unbelievable. But you know
looking back at what people were owning
I mean there is that you know people in
the 401k element but people who were
working there were freely buying Enron
stock right this according to economic
models you should be diversifying you
already have a bunch of Enron stock in
your 401k you shouldn't be taking your
discretionary spending and buying more
Enron stock and that's exactly what was
happening
>> you know this home bias applies
all around the world at least The US is
a big country. I wrote a paper once
about the Swedish uh social sec uh sort
of 401k plan. This was a risky move
because I was making fun of it and there
was some award that might happen. But
[laughter]
um anyway, uh Sweden is 1% of world GDP.
>> Tiny tiny GDP, tiny
>> and they weren't putting most of their
money in Swedish stocks. It's crazy.
they they ignore the other 99% of the
world. But that that just goes to show
you the bias. So the obvious question is
if you two were advising a portfolio
manager, what sort of behavioral
principles would you emphasize for them
to build a robust portfolio?
Well, as you know, I one hat I have is
I'm involved in a company that does this
>> that has also has your name on the door.
>> It also has my name on the door. Fuller
and Thaylor asset management. And I now
let me say I cannot name a single stock
we own. [laughter]
And no one at the firm would think it's
a good idea for me to be making
suggestions. We're buy small cap stocks.
So, uh, it's, you know, if we owned
Apple or Tesla, I might know it, but we
don't buy any big stock. So, they're
mostly companies you've never heard of
and I've never heard of them. But this
is because you've identified a
behavioral issue that is now reflected
in the model that you they use to
purchase.
>> Right. So we we're not uh we're not a
quant shop,
>> which is a little unusual for a firm
that's run by some academics. Um but
each strategy is based on a bias. So
there's one that's based on
overreaction, there's one that's based
on underreaction. So we are we try to
find stocks that we think the rest of
the market is making a mistake about.
Mhm.
>> And then we forbid the portfolio
managers from forecasting earnings
>> because we that they're going to be, you
know, do we think with our 30 employees
that we're going to make better
forecasts than Fidelity?
>> It's crazy.
>> But we think we have an advantage
because we're trying to predict
something else. We're trying to predict
the mistakes.
It's like you're a baseball fan. If
there's a pitcher that is a sinker ball
pitcher,
uh so the Alex, this means the ball goes
down [laughter] as it approaches the
plate. These foreigners, but you know,
uh if there's a sinker ball pitcher, you
and I can predict batters are going to
hit ground balls because they are
fooled. The ball drops and if you hit it
slightly above center, the ball goes
down. So you don't have to be able to
hit a ball to know it's going to go
down.
And so we don't have to be able to
forecast earnings to predict that other
people are going to be predicting too
high.
>> I want to bring this this back to the
book because one of the concepts
underlying the book was, hey, there's a
reproducibility issue in in social
sciences. How well have these anomalies
and the theories you built around them,
how well is this held up? How robust and
reproducible are these findings? And it
turns out very talk to us about what
what you guys discovered when you were
revisiting all of these principles that
were first written about 20 30 years
ago.
>> Yeah. So as you mentioned there's a
there's a some might call a crisis of
reproducibility in social science more
broadly. So this is psychology, some
sociology, uh etc. And the worry is that
you know these anomalies that were
published in in the 80s and 90s these
are the bedrock of the entire field of
behavioral economics. And you might be
worried like look maybe these things
don't reproduce. And there's two ways
that they can't they don't reproduce.
One you run the same experiment again
and it doesn't work. It was P hacked as
I said like small sample sizes no
incentives. The second way it might not
reproduce is that it literally only
reproduces in the exact conditions it
was run originally with college students
at low stakes. You go out in a different
population with people who are a bit
more sophisticated know what's going on
and you know it doesn't work.
>> So what we did in the book was to say
look first let's take the exact same
experiments and run them again.
Everybody knows about you know uh the
the original anomaly so maybe they don't
work because people are like ah this is
a loss aversion experiment. I know
what's going on. I'm not going to do
this. This is the endowment effect. I'm
not going to do this. So, we just
replicated them directly on a completely
different platform. So, we used an
online crowdsourcing platform called
Prolific.
Basically, everything works. Everything
works. And we, you know, you don't have
to take our word for it. We, if you go
on the website of the book, we posted
all of the results of our replications,
but also instructions on how you can do
it yourself. So, if somebody's like,
"Ah, I don't I don't I don't know about
these guys." uh run them yourself and
you know people are still losers. They
still have the endowment effect. Um
things like the conjunction fallacy, the
Linda problem that that Richard was
talking about all work still. Uh the
second part is this external validity
part. Does anybody other than college
students display these these effects?
And that's kind of the updates part of
the book is and the answer is yes. you
know the loss aversion has been uh and
the myopic loss aversion ver part part
that's been used to explain the equity
premium puzzle that's still
reproducible. We also do a bunch of out
of sample tests of the of the uh uh
anomalies that didn't use experimental
data. Um and you know that replicates
out of sample too. So people aren't
learning the psychology is the same.
>> You know one of one of the columns was
about the equity premium puzzle. We
didn't include this in the book because
it's a little wonky, but the equity
premium is just the difference in
returns between stocks and bonds. The
equity premium puzzle is how big it is.
And theory says it should be like less
than 1%. And historically it was about
7%.
>> Wow.
>> And the article about that was in the
early 80s. So we've had 40 years of data
since the puzzle was announced. The
equity premium exactly the same. It's
what I mean 1% lower. So um and that's
what we see basically everywhere.
Everything's the same. So, so one of the
um concepts that people have challenged
as not being very reproducible has been
the concept of priming to some sometimes
uh anchoring is is similar but that
seems to be more reproducible. But when
I hear Linda the bank teller story that
feels like the framing of that is very
much a priming when you hear about her
as politically active and uh being
involved in what how do you distinguish
when you have these theoretical
overlapping biases that all kind of
interact with each other?
>> Yeah. So priming is actually a huge
literature in cognitive psychology.
Basic priming is very robust. Mhm.
>> So, it's the idea of, you know, I say a
bunch of words that start with a K. What
comes to mind? A word that starts with a
K that's going to reproduce any day of
the week.
>> There's a special subset of priming
research that was done kind of in the
'9s, early 2000s that kind of took this
to an extreme
>> which is so here's an example. Let's say
you're doing word search and there's a
bunch of words that have to do with like
oranges, palm trees, hot weather, like
vaguely related with Florida, right?
>> And then that's supposed to prime in
your brain old people.
>> And the result, the dependent variable
was that those subjects who had those
words, they walked a little slower out
of the lab,
>> right? I mean, that's it's a little
crazy,
>> right? Kind of tough to to measure also.
>> Yeah. So I mean it reli there's a lot of
degrees of freedom the researcher can be
looking in a certain direction you know
and those tend tend to not reproduce the
sort of priming that
the something like Linda uh the Linda
problem for example has that's more in
the kind of cognitive psychology
wheelhouse of like what do you think
about when I describe a person who takes
part in radical rallies what comes to
mind this is this is a basic concept in
memory right so um the and the second
part that that I wanted to to say is
that priming as far as like looking at
the behavioral economics research
priming is a really small part. It was
actually not really featured much in the
book. Um but but the type that is uh
that was used by uh you know uh Terski
and Conaman it's much more in the
wheelhouse of just basic cognitive
psychology
>> more like anchoring. Does anchoring
still hold up?
>> Oh yeah.
>> Very well.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And look, one of the things
when when I was writing those columns,
the I could pick anything.
>> I picked big effect sizes.
>> And some of the problem, you know, we
talked earlier about the norm in
economics to make models smarter and
smarter. I think there was a norm in
psychology for results to get cleverer
and clever. Well, I thought Alex's paper
where you randomly sell versus what was
actually sold, that was a very clever
setup for a for a paper.
>> It was clever, but it wasn't the what I
was deriding is a norm that the models
>> assume people are being clever as
opposed to designing a clever paper.
We're all for clever papers,
>> okay?
>> We we like clever papers. So, when I was
choosing to what columns to write about,
I picked big stuff. And it think about
uh there's a well-known company that
makes uh cinnamon buns
>> and has the strategy of pumping the
smell of that out into the airport.
>> Now, uh let's say you're on a lowcarb
diet, just hypothetically.
hypothetically,
>> you know, if you walk by that thing,
that's that's priming and that works.
>> Mhm.
>> And it it's not
>> it's not clever. It just works,
>> right? It's a big effect size.
>> So there are and so everything I wrote
about
>> was big and it's because I wanted to
pick things that I thought were
wellestablished.
And so, you know, it I think if I had
looked for cute little things
>> Mhm.
>> then some of them would have failed to
replicate.
>> You also pick things that people were
actively attacking and adversarily
trying to replicate at the time that you
were writing it.
>> Yeah. I mean, look, take take the
ultimatum game.
>> Okay.
>> Right. That's one of the original
columns and one that we include in the
book. The game is very simple. I give
Barry $100. I say, "Share it with Alex.
You can give whatever proportion of the
hundred you want to Alex." He says yes
or no. If if he says yes, he give he
gets whatever you offered and you get
the rest. If he says no, you both get
nothing.
Now the standard economic model at the
time predicts that Alex will accept
anything because something is better
than nothing. Barry knows that Alex will
accept anything
and so he offers him a dollar and Alex
accepts.
Now, real people,
only an economist would think that
that's a really good prediction.
Anybody who's not an economist is going
to say, "What are you kidding? I'm not
going to take a dollar and give you 99.
You didn't do do anything to deserve
that 99." So, if you run that
experiment,
uh if you offer less than 20%,
you're going to get rejected. And the
profit maximizing offer is about 40%.
And most people offer half.
>> Okay. Now, there were big fights.
Uh there was a professor from uh Brit
who Yeah. Uh who was saying this was
challenging game theory.
And no, it wasn't challenging game
theory. It was challenging the idea that
the agents
only care about money and don't care
about being treated fairly.
>> So let let's address that because I I I
love the evolutionary biology of this.
Humans were cooperative social primates.
We have neither fangs nor claws. So we
had to come up with some way to stay
alive. And it turns out cooperating in a
tribe is very useful um survival tactic.
It seems that an inherent sense of
fairness is somewhat built into all of
us as well as social status seeking. Um,
so how much of this
issue in economics derives from not
understanding a little bit of
evolutionary history?
>> You know, it's a tricky thing.
Obviously, we have evolved to be who we
are. There are some people who then say,
well, that means whatever we do is
optimal.
>> Well, maybe, maybe not.
>> No, that's stupid. [laughter] I mean, we
evolved on the savannah,
>> right?
>> Right. And
>> nothing about picking mun bonds from a a
large
>> assignment. You know, uh Amos Diverski
was famous for oneliners
and he had a a oneliner about loss
aversion.
>> Mhm.
>> Which was there may have been species
that did not exhibit loss aversion and
they're now extinct.
Right. So if you're at subsistence,
it's really smart to be worried about
losing.
>> It's an existential threat,
>> right?
>> But you know, none the three of us,
we could go several days without eating.
Some more more days than others.
>> Right. [snorts]
>> Right. So we're we're not at
subsistence.
And yeah, we have managing our own
portfolios is something people have been
doing for 30 years.
>> Mhm.
>> Right. Yeah. The rich people
but they had their broker do it. Right.
So there's no evolutionary history of
how to manage a portfolio.
And uh even saving for retirement
people didn't live long enough to worry
about that. And if you were unlucky
enough to reach my age, then you you
hoped your kids would take care of you
and they lived nearby,
you know. Then people started scattering
and penicellin and you know, so now we
live long and and and our kids are
scattered and they have no interest in
having us move in with them. So people
had to learn a very new thing and they
needed some help.
>> Really really fascinating. So we didn't
talk about the where the from whence the
title of the winner's curse comes from.
Why don't before we get to the future of
behavioral finance, let's let's talk
about the winner's curse, tell us where
the name comes from. the concept the I
should say the title of the book comes
from the title of one of the chapters
and I picked it as the title back then
because it's sort of a fun phrase and a
bit intriguing and the concept itself is
interesting and important. The idea is
this. Suppose you have a lot of people
bidding for some object that's worth the
same to everybody.
And it could be when you do this as a
demonstration in the class, you fill up
a jar of jelly beans or coins and say
it's 10 cents for each jelly bean and
it's $100
in the jar. Now we're going to auction
it off. high bidder wins the $100, but
they don't know what
>> they don't know it's worth $100.
>> All they see is a lot of coins or jelly
beans. What happens? Well, the average
bid is less than $100 because people are
riskaverse. Mhm. But the winning bid is
always above $100
if you have enough people because the
most optimistic forecast
is likely the highest bid and it's too
high. Now, this was not discovered by
psychologists in the lab. It was
discovered by engineers at Atlantic
Richfield. Arco,
>> the energy company. the energy company
who discovered they were bidding for oil
leases in what I continue to insist on
calling the Gulf of Mexico.
And they realized that the
leases they won had less oil than they
expected.
And they said, "Gee, we thought we had
worldclass geologists.
What's going on? Are they dummies? And
then they realized
that it's quite subtle that the the what
you're trying to do is make a bid that
will make you money
if you win.
And the if you win part, if there's a
hundred people bidding,
gee, do I really want to win because
maybe I misunderstood something. Right?
So that's the winner's curse. And um it
it was f found and replicated on bidding
for oil leases.
Uh, it's relevant in book publishing
>> when they're bidding contests for books
for
>> Yes. Yes.
>> So, let me let me see if I can clarify
the the the way you're describing the
winner's car. So, we're bidding for oil
leases. We don't know exactly how much
oil is going to come out of this hole
for or or area for the next 10 20 years.
And when there's many people bidding,
all of which are advised by geologists,
if you make a conservative bet, the odds
are you're going to lose. But if you
make a bet that's high enough that
you're going to win, the odds are it's
not going to be a money maker,
>> right?
>> So, so what is that? I I shared with you
um an article I saw recently. Some real
estate group did a study of tens of
thousands of home transactions where
there was a bidding war and they found
something very similar. The winners of
the bidding war ended up paying much
more than the subsequent home value was
determined by looking at comparable
homes in the neighborhood. So is the
purpose of an auction to identify
something at a fair value where it's
profitable for you or is the purpose of
an auction to win at any cost?
>> Well,
so there are two interesting aspects of
that. One is suppose you're these
engineers and you've discovered this.
What should you do?
And
if you're losing money every time you
win an auction, you could not bid, but
then you don't have any places to drill.
And what did they decide to do is really
clever. They decided to write a paper
[laughter]
>> in order to get people to stop over
bidding.
>> Yeah. Now, that's different than what
the owners of Major League Baseball do.
>> I was going to say, why didn't they just
uh moneyball it? Why don't they just
start looking at ugly but productive?
>> Well, uh I what the Major League
Baseball owners did is they colluded,
>> right?
>> And they said, "Look, let's not bid
anymore."
>> Well, the salary caps that are in all
these
>> No, no, there was just out outright
collusion. When baseball players first
became free agents,
>> Uhhuh.
>> the owner said, "Hey, we're losing money
on these crazy auctions. Let's just not
bid." and then they got slapped down,
>> right?
>> So, uh what can you do?
I
you can try to a good strategy is to bid
very low on every site.
>> And the in the data there were lots of
sites that you could have gotten for a
dollar
>> really.
And
>> because because the consensus was
there's no there there
>> and
>> were any of them productive? Did any of
these?
>> Some of them will be
>> really. So now let's bring this back to
sports because you've written papers on
NFL drafts. Um
>> so the the the NFL draft every year
there's
uh they have a draft for new players.
The first pick is given to the team with
the worst record. the previous year
>> with the idea that that's going to be a
big advantage to them and will help them
improve. Cade Massie, one of my former
students, he and I wrote a paper showing
that the first pick is actually not the
most valuable because the league has a
salary each the first player gets paid
the most. And you can trade the first
pick for the seventh and eighth picks or
for five second round picks. And what we
showed is if if you trade the first pick
for lower picks, you get more
value. So now this is known like the
Arco engineers publishing the paper.
>> And yet there still seems to be this
frenetic war for top top one, top three,
top five picks.
>> Has the NFL learned any lessons from the
research?
almost nothing.
They So they have learned that you
should they only trade up to get the
first pick to pick a quarterback.
>> Mhm.
>> So that's smart because the quarterbacks
are more valuable than any other player.
>> Well, of course you want that first pick
so you could get a Tom Brady. Yeah,
>> except
>> except Tom Brady was taken with the
199th pick. And all the listeners who
are football fans can have their list of
people who were taken with the first
pick and turned out to be busts. The
Chicago Bears seem to specialize in
that, although let's hope this current
guy uh is a new one. So how much of this
like I'm seeing this through the lens of
my book which I don't want to talk about
but how much of this is just how
difficult it is to predict the future to
to have truly expert judgment about
these very complex very variable so uh
uh selecting quarterbacks identifying
oil uh leases like it seems that
supposed expert advice ain't all that
expert. How much of this is aren't we
better off just being a little more
humble about our let's give up the top
pick and have five second round?
Somebody in that five is likely to be
half decent. Right.
>> So let let me stick to the sports for
one second because there's one statistic
from our paper and we've just we're
coincidentally we've been in a process
of replicating that study. So, I have
the new data, but here's the statistic.
Take all the players at a given
position, say quarterback or cornerback
or running back. Rank them in the order
in which they're picked. And now ask
the fourth guy, what's the chance he's
better than the fifth guy? So, for the
for the whole thing, so what's the
chance the earlier player is better than
the next one? one over two, 10 over 11,
5 over six.
>> Now, if they're perfect, it'll be 100%.
>> If they're coin flipping, it'll be 50%.
>> What do you think it is?
>> I think it's less than 50%. I think it's
negative.
>> They They know less than nothing,
>> right? That's right. I I think it's in
the 30s or 40s.
>> Well, they're not that bad. I mean,
because if they were, then you could
just You know what? You No. No. You'd
want to what the George Castanza you
want to do the opposite. Right.
>> That's right.
>> So, so no, they don't have negative
knowledge. They have a tiny little It's
53%.
>> Okay. So, but that's your point really,
which is they think they know this guy
is the next Tom Brady and there's only a
53% chance that he's better than the
next one. And you know, Patrick Mahomes,
Josh Allen think none of these were
first pick,
>> right? That's right.
>> Right. So,
>> this Mahomes kid is gonna be pretty good
one.
>> I think he might make it.
>> Yeah, he's got some potential.
>> Right. So, and I think that is so
getting off of sports, I think that your
general point is exactly right that
people are look overconfidence. Danny
Conorman used to say that's the mother
of all biases
>> and it we fall into these traps because
we think we know more than we do.
And uh if we had some humility, maybe if
we listened to our spouses more often
[laughter]
because at least in my house,
um my wife doesn't think that I know
anything. So she's always bringing me
back to 50%. [laughter]
>> And and she's usually right.
>> My my wife is from the same cut from the
same cloth. So, so I want to bring Alex
back into this. So, when we're thinking
about the future of behavioral economics
and and what this means for investors or
regular people making financial
decisions or in significant decisions,
what direction are we moving in? are are
are
we learning from all of this knowledge
that's been accumulated or are we just
destined to make the same mistakes over
and over again?
>> I don't think we're destined to do
anything. uh I think it's a choice to
look take you know read papers and look
at papers on kind of published in
financial journals where people are
making mistakes and then to choose to
say like look I actually can correct
this by having a particular decision aid
or uh asking my spouse what to do or
something like that. So you know what a
paper you mentioned earlier we published
this uh actually just last year um
called selling fast and buying slow um
and in that paper basically we look at
institutional investors so thinking
about who in the economy are least
likely to be exhibiting behavioral
biases you know maybe retail traders
they're like you know drinking beer in
their basement while trading stocks on
Robin Hood maybe the this is not the
sophisticated people we want to be
looking at um but you know institutional
investors the average portfolio in the
data set was like 600 million, $700
million or something like that. Um, we
had a data set where we actually saw
every single thing they did over
something like a 12 or 13 year period uh
as far as what they're buying and what
they're selling. And what we found is
because the data is so rich, we can
actually construct these counterfactual
portfolios. We can say, look, I see what
you're buying. What if you bought
something else? So, it could be
something else from your portfolio. you
can top something up or you can buy
something new from the from the
universe. On the other hand, we could
say, look, same thing for for selling. I
saw you sold Apple, you I saw you sold
Samsung. Let me sell something else
instead. How how would that perform
relative to what you actually did? Um,
and what we found is that on the buying
side, people actually did really well. I
mean these guys are in they have
>> they really will but better better
[snorts] than random
>> fund managers create some value in their
stock selection when they're making
purchases
>> but the flip side of that not so much
>> no not so much we had uh we really
wanted to be conservative uh we didn't
want to you know say compare them to the
benchmark or something like that we said
let's throw a dart at your portfolio and
sell that instead of what you actually
>> so instead of selling what the manager
wants to sell you would sell something
else randomly from the rest of the
portfolio.
>> Yeah. A random selling
>> and the performance difference was how
significant?
>> U basically same difference but in the
opposite direction [laughter]
>> meaning
>> so they were losing a ton of money.
>> So 100 200 basis points on a random cell
better performance.
>> Exactly. And you know the way when I
read that paper um and wrote about it,
the way I rationalized it or tried to
conceptualize it was they're bringing a
very objective quantitative approach to
the stock selection issue, but it seems
that their cells are filled with biases
and squishy decision-making. Is that a a
fair
>> description? Yeah, exactly. So that we
found no evidence for huristics on their
buying decision. like we couldn't find
anything like they just seem to be very
disciplined and know no and uh and
principled about what they're buying but
on the selling side we found literally
the same biases that we found in the
lab. Has has there been any evolution or
improvement in this recently? That's the
question that I keep coming back to. It
seems that you Richard you figured a lot
of these things out 25 35 years ago. Are
we any better at making unbiased
decisions or are we still subject to the
same foibless?
>> I think you need something extra, right?
You can't just say I'm not going to do
this and I have decided not to listen to
my psychology. That's what it would look
like to be better.
>> Choice architecture or building some
guard rails and defaults.
>> This is where overconfidence comes in.
When you read a paper about somebody
doing something silly, your first
reaction is not me.
>> Right? That's them. That's not the blind
spot.
>> This is called the bias blind spot.
Exactly. So this is a well-replicated
finding when you ask people to what
extent do you exhibit a bias? I don't.
Obviously I'm a smart person. But to
what extent do other people of course
you know other people are bad at
selling. I'm really good. But in order
to adopt choice architecture to help you
out when making decisions, you actually
have to be have some you have to have a
lot of humility to say look these
institutional investors to say looks
like I'm not really doing so well on
selling. I'm going to adopt some choice
architecture so I don't suffer from
these biases. Maybe I'll hire somebody
else to help me out. maybe I'll think
longer or use the same sort of a
research technology for my selling as
I'm doing for my buying. And because
that requires humility, which most
people don't have a lot of, that's
that's really hard to do. So, I think
that's why we're seeing a lot of these
biases just be perpetuated uh forward to
the point where we're, you know, running
the same analyses now as we did 30 years
ago and finding the exact same thing.
So, so the the question that since we
were talking about sports and and
lack of knowledge and then you mentioned
Robin Hood, one of the things that's a
little concerning is how some companies
are putting our knowledge of biases and
bad behavior to work for their own
profit. So when we see the gamification
of investing with Robin Hood or just the
incredible rise not just of sports books
and gambling but you could bet on every
play it's reached a point where it's
ridiculous and there is robust evidence
that especially young men are having all
sorts of how can we how can we deal with
what seems to be um not a good use of
choice architecture but a bad use of cho
choice architecture at least. as far as
the the public is concerned.
>> Yeah, it's a very good question, Barry,
and one to which I don't have a pat
answer.
>> I mean, you it's tempting to say, look,
the all these sports betting apps and
the gamification of of investing are bad
for people. On the other hand, people
like doing it. They're mostly adults. do
and you know prohibition basically
didn't work,
>> right?
>> So I I think some disclosure
would help.
>> Um it it's
difficult to find out what the odds are
in a lot of these things.
>> Um but it's it's a tough question. I had
a conversation uh on this book with Nate
Silver a couple weeks ago and we talked
a lot about um sports gambling. He's a
professional gambler
>> and he spent a year betting on NBA games
and basically broke even,
>> right?
>> So, you know, if Nate can't make money
doing this, chances are you can't. And
you know my advice would be look if you
really think you like doing this
do it on a small scale.
>> Mhm.
>> You know
>> don't bet the house look.
>> Don't don't Right. And the same with
weekly options or daily.
>> That's one of the most popular one of
our colleagues at University of Chicago
did an analysis of what retail traders
are actually doing on Robin Hood. And
one of the most popular products which
because it's pushed by Robin Hood is
weekly options
>> and there's now end of day options where
it expires you have till four o'clock to
either make money or not.
>> So you know if you want to risk one
month's pay on that fine
>> not just not every month. No. And yes.
[laughter] Yeah. That's your lifetime
budget. And when it goes to zero, switch
to something else.
>> I'm I'm a big fan of the cowboy account
where you take three or 4% of your
portfolio. And if you want to fool
around with options, whatever, knock
yourself out. And if it makes money,
great. But like we've seen, you
mentioned Apple, if it was your whole
portfolio, you would never have been
able to ride it
>> to be a 5x or a 10x. you would have
taken I'm up 20 bucks. I'm taking the
money off the table.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, people long
ago would adopt the strategy of bringing
a certain amount of money to the casino,
>> right?
>> And then of course the casinos put ATMs
>> right
>> on the floor. So, it's a battle. But
mental accounting, you have a gambling
account,
>> but that's it.
>> Yeah. I mean, it would be better if it
were zero,
>> right?
>> But otherwise, set it up. That's
something you can afford to lose. And
when you've lost it all,
>> you're stop.
>> Don't go to the ATM.
>> That's right. So, so I only have you for
a few more minutes. I want to ask two of
my favorite questions that I want to ask
each of you that I ask all of my guests.
Starting with what sort of advice would
you give a recent college grad
interested in a career in either
behavioral finance or economics? Alex,
you're you're the more recent grad. What
what would you what would your advice
be?
>> Uh get teched up. Really get teched up.
Uh I think that's the biggest kind of
difference between even when I was in
graduate school and what I'm seeing
hiring predocs and raas the sort of work
that you're doing in modern behavioral
economics modern finance it just
requires a different level of analysis
like
>> so is this learning to code or is this
becoming a prompt engineer for AI what
>> I think you still got to learn to code I
think you know we're I I I work uh in
the applied AI group at Booth you know
you still got to learn to code and a lot
of the sort of modern analyses that
people are doing particularly as
behavioral finance behavioral econ has
moved out of the lab into the field
these data sets are huge uh machine
learning AI tools the type of people who
are getting hired are doing
sophisticated analysis
>> so it's still basically STEM groups
science technology engineering
[clears throat] and math for people
>> uh who don't know the acronym
>> but applied specifically to the field
>> yeah and like you know you take your
economics courses you take your finance
courses take some CS courses on the
side. Those are uh this is what I wished
I would have done right when I was
getting my PhD. It wasn't on my radar to
take, you know, a coding class in the CS
department. People coming out now, the
ones who are really successful, you have
to have good ideas. That's a uh
necessary condition. Uh it's not a
sufficient condition.
>> Uh you still you got you you need to be
teched up to a level that I I don't
think we were seeing back when I was
graduating.
>> Really interesting.
>> And I'll reinforce that with the
following. I think
You need some practical experience.
Yeah.
>> Because the part that you don't learn in
a textbook is you you get this gigantic
data set and it's noisy and there are
errors and so learning how to clean up a
data set.
>> I you got to learn that through
experience.
>> Really interesting. And our final
question, what do you know about the
world of behavioral economics today
would have been useful back in the 1970s
and 80s when you were getting started
and in the 2000s when you were getting
started? So I think if we go back, we
talked about the changes that I helped
make in the retirement plans
and what I wish I had been able to
accomplish more of is making retirement
saving v at the workplace available to
the possibly 40% of American workers
whose firms don't offer that option. and
there there were plans around and um
they didn't get passed the I think uh
the system they have in the UK is a
reasonable model which is
>> there's a requirement that any firm with
more than I don't I'm not sure the
number say 20 employees
has to offer a plan and automatically
enroll
people into the plan and the government
has like a generic plan they can use
like the government thrift program. So
there and th this is useful because
>> big firms like Fidelity and Vanguard
don't really want tiny accounts,
>> right?
>> So make it easy for an employer.
They they don't have to do anything.
They just have to let their employees
enroll in this and then when they change
jobs, they can keep it there because the
real problem is they go to work for a
while at this firm and they work there
for a year and they've saved $600 and
then they leave and they take the cash
out. So we need automatic rollover.
>> So that that's the piece of the puzzle.
that I don't know whether I could have
done anything about, but it's what I
wish we could work on now.
>> So, related to that, what do you think
of these new baby accounts? Every
newborn in America next year gets a
$1,000
has to be invested domestically, which
you know, we can have an argument. We
were talking about home country bias,
but still you're starting every infant
off with a portfolio. What are your
thoughts on that?
I I don't know the details of how that's
going to work. You could uh
my friend and sometime colleague when
I'm in Berkeley Olria Malendier has made
a similar proposal in Germany where
she's on the German Council of Economic
Advisors. I think the idea is to give
kids
some uh experience with the stock market
and I think that could be useful. Um I I
I don't know how this is going to wash
out and all of these things end up being
tilted toward the rich. Hm.
>> I mean, there were big reforms made
recently to the retirement plans. One of
the reforms was to let you wait longer
to start making withdrawals. Who do you
think that helps?
>> People who are wealthy, healthy, and
going to have a longer lifespan,
>> right? So most people start taking the
money out at 59 and a half. Raising the
mi the date at which you have to start
from 70 to 72
doesn't help anybody that's in any
trouble.
>> Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. Alex,
what what do you know today about
behavioral finance that you wish you
knew when you were getting started?
Um I think what I
when I was getting started I wasn't
really thinking about kind of t being
able to target these big institutional
investors and thinking about uh getting
data sets on
smart money in the economy. So I think
when I was starting out I was really
focused on lab experiments. I was really
focused on kind of the data that's that
was available. Um, and if I was starting
out now, I would I would start my PhD
trying to get trying to get data sets
that I eventually was able to get
because the types of as far as like
looking at my research, what has had the
largest impact, what has had, you know,
people in finance in in the professional
world calling me up and saying, "Hey,
uh, what do you think about this or
that?" It's been looking at the
population that people are actually
interested in, which are, you know, the
smart money in the economy. So I think
um and this is I think a you know you
have this analogy of of looking under
the spot under the street light where is
a lot of behavioral finance
>> for the missing car keys on the street
light
>> you know where are you looking oh it's
where the data sets already are so you
know Terry Odine was had this genius
idea in 98 when he published his paper
what did he do he made that data set
available now it's easy to just oh I got
an idea why don't I look at Terry's data
set tererry's data that is great, but
it's three years in the '9s with, you
know, a couple hundred retail traders,
and that tells you about that specific
population, but you can't have a field
evolve looking at three years of retail
traders with $10,000 portfolios. So, I
think if I was going to the field now
and thinking about, you know, um what
have I learned? It's the power of
getting data sets and running analyses
on
on populations that are important for
the economy and for finance.
>> Really, really fascinating. Um,
gentlemen, thank you so much for doing
this. We have been speaking with Richard
Thaylor and Alex Emis, both of the Booth
School of Business about their updated
version of The Winner's Curse. Strong
recommendation. If you enjoy this
conversation, well, check out any of the
we've done over the past 12 years. You
can find those at iTunes, Spotify,
Bloomberg, [music]
YouTube, wherever you get your favorite
podcasts. And be sure to check out my
new book, How Not to Invest: The Ideas,
Numbers, and Behavior [music] That
Destroys Wealth and How to Avoid Them. I
would be remiss if I did not thank the
crack team that helps put these
conversations together each week. Alexis
Noriega is my video producer. [music]
Sean Russo is my researcher. Anna Luke
is my producer. Sage Bowman is the head
of podcast here at Bloomberg. I'm Barry
Rholz. You've been listening [music] to
Masters in Business on Bloomberg Radio.